---
layout: post
title:  "Montenegro"
date:   2022-05-30 18:17:11 +0200
categories: [common-sense]
last_edit: 2022-11-10
published: false
---

Affordable, charming and raw

### Visas 
#### Montenegro
For EU citizens no visas needed. EU citizens can stay for up to 90 days. During
the stay need to register where You stay at Tourist info centers. 1 Eur per
adult per day, for first month, the latter 2 month - just register. Kids need
registration also, for free. ID cards are nothing HERE, only passports. While in
some cities You may stay longer than 90 days, it is kinda illegal. Learned it
the expensive way. South cities are more agile, whereas the north is more
strict. [official website for visa information](https://www.gov.me/en/article/visas-and-visa-regime)

#### Bosnia & Herzegovina
Same 90 days, registration is cheaper, like 5 Eur per person per registration,
including kids. Cannot comment on how strict Bosnian police and border control
are. [official website for visa information](https://www.mfa.gov.rs/en/citizens/travel-abroad/visas-and-states-travel-advisory/bosnia-and-herzegovina)

### Food

It is generally cheap to eat out and dish sizes are impressive, in Bosnia it
becomes super cheap, yet I will still complain. Food is My greatest
disappointment in Balkans.

It is hard to find something that would taste good. Best dish I would advise is
“Chevapi”, has 3 ingredients on plate: meat, bread, raw sliced onions That is
it. No sauces or mustard - nothing. Still consider it the best thing I have
eaten here. That is saying something.

Mashed potatoes are often served from a packaged mix. There is no soup in
traditional way, when it is called soup - most likely it comes from a package
also, would suggest to look for “Chobra” - that is half porridge-soup, cannot
imagine it coming from a package.

Eggs, don’t know why, but smell somewhat bad, when You cook them. Same goes for
chicken and sometimes pork. Beef is the safest choice of meat in this region.

Bread is always fresh, variety of sizes and shapes. Burek - the tastiest
product of local bakeries, pastry and meat. Bit hard to digest though. 

Since butter for some reason is super expensive here, and grocery stores have
huge variety of margarine, the latter, I would imagine, is heavily used. Same
goes for special pasta sauces, containing non-trace amounts of palm oil. 

And one thing I cannot understand, there are lots of BBQ or Grill places, not
ever I seen a meat that been cured before cooking. In my home Baltics,
everybody cures meat before grill. 

Cakes & deserts - almost perfect, need to exclude the creamy cakes, I am speculating 
it come from spray cans.


### Drinks

Great coffe in every place I ever been. Maybe there are no Lattes with oat-milk
type of coffe in every place, but usual espresso or americano are perfect.
Local beers taste like beer. Rakia - very pleasant strong booze, while being
served in shot-like glasses, is a long drink. You suppose to sip it. Never saw
a local person being drunk, while locals sip something “everyday”. The alcohol
consumption looks kind of pleasant here.

### Local people 

Tall, strong and friendly. Very welcoming and polite towards small children.
Seems like families are still important here. Big families. Healthy man-woman
relationship climate (patriarchy).

### Renting

Several options on the internet: 
* airbnb will mostly have studios or 1 bedroom apartments
* [realitica.com](https://realitica.com) there are rumors that locals use it.

It feels that most rentals are on the small side, like 1 bedroom studio, or just studio. 
Have not heard of scams that would happen to foreigners renting.

### Internet

Physical network and services, seem to be less developed than in Estonia or Latvia.
No app to call taxi, or food delivery. Chat messengers are heavily used for everything.

### Taxi 

Heavily relied on taxi, only once I got a bigger bill that it is suppose to be. 
And as usual, near the airport.

### Language

Seems like in tourist regions Russian language is more known by locals than English.
Given that locals are welcoming, they will wait for You to google-translate, if You get 
stuck. Never seen a odd look for Me not speaking or mispronouncing. 


Once my [CTO](/people/#andrey-kazakov) told Me a legend that christian
missionaries in Africa, when spread the crhistian religion, they needed to
speak to locals, so they developed a "missionary dictionary" it had the
absolute minimum to get by, and do the job. Legend claimed it was several
hundreds of words. Could not search online for that "missionaries dictionary".
But found a polyhlot person [Petrov
Dmitry](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%9F%D0%B5%D1%82%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B2,_%D0%94%D0%BC%D0%B8%D1%82%D1%80%D0%B8%D0%B9_%D0%AE%D1%80%D1%8C%D0%B5%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%87_(%D0%BF%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B2%D0%BE%D0%B4%D1%87%D0%B8%D0%BA)),
method claims You need 350-400 words to get by in any country. Examining the
method itself, is too long, so this
[article](https://zen.yandex.ru/media/id/6064ef5edcc34c67f636d280/kakie-slova-nujno-znat-chtoby-razgovarivat-na-liubom-iazyke-metod-petrova-poliglot-6087110c391ac940906eafeb)
gives the summary. So there are 8 bullets on how to. 
1. Verbs (30 pcs)
2. Verbs in times

| Verb | present | past | future |
|----- |---------|------|--------|
|Be | Biti | Bilo je | Biti če  |
|Have | Imati | Imao | Imati ču |
|Walk | Iči | Hodao | Iči ču |
|Come | Be | was | will be |
|Do | Be | was | will be |
|Give | Be | was | will be |
|Want | Be | was | will be |
|Speak | Be | was | will be |
|Say | Be | was | will be |
|Eat | Be | was | will be |
|Know | Be | was | will be |
|Lay | Be | was | will be |
|Think | Be | was | will be |
|See | Be | was | will be |
|Watch | Be | was | will be |
|Hear | Be | was | will be |
|Take | Be | was | will be |
|Like | Be | was | will be |
|Can | Be | was | will be |
|Understand | Be | was | will be |
|Work | Be | was | will be |
|Look | Be | was | will be |
|Write | Be | was | will be |
|Show | Be | was | will be |
|Ask | Be | was | will be |
|Answer | Be | was | will be |
|Forget | Be | was | will be |
|Pass | Be | was | will be |

3. pronouns (7 pcs)
I, You, He, She, It, We, They
4. adverbs (9 pcs)

| application | full | partial | negation |
|---|----- |---------|------|
| humans |everybody | somebody | nobody |
| stuff |everything | something | nothing |
| place |everyere | somewere | nowere |
|time |always | sometimes | never |

5. prepositions (8pcs)

| preposition | full |
|---|----- |
| on | na |
| over | nad |
| to | do |
| under | pod |
| from | iz |
| between | izmedu |
| with | s |
| without | bez |

6. adjectives (17 pcs)

| adjctive | translation |
|---|----- |
| Who | tko / ko je |
| What |što |
| Which |koji |
| How |kako |
| Why |zašto |
| Where |gdje |
| From where |odakle |
| How much |koliko |
| and | i |
| But | ali |
| For | za |
| Because | jer |
| until | do |
| after | nakon |
| this | ovaj |
| or | ili |
| about | oko |

7. numbers, calendar

| adjctive | translation |
|---|----- |
| one |  |

8. nouns
