---
layout: post
title:  "It is your own fault"
date:   2022-05-30 18:17:11 +0200
categories: [common-sense]
last_edit: 2022-07-26
published: true
---

An eccentric person, Dana Pena, says You should never be sorry([here](https://youtu.be/ALmB2e361cU?t=27)), inspired this post.  
You have been warned. 

Funny how we have a lot of words for fault and guilt and everything between, 
even the neutral word "responsibility" usually implies that something went wrong,
and someone better be responsible for it. Looked up synonyms and antonyms for word 
`guilty` on [thesarus.com](https://www.thesaurus.com/browse/guilty), it 
is 40+ synonyms versus 9 antonyms.  
Similar correlations would be for *russian* and *latvian* languages.

Some of Us are developers, hence We might know, that language have some impact on 
how ideas are formulated, and what ecosystems and uses arise from it. The usual ones, like 
* `java` == classes, DI, corporate applications 
* `python` == scripting, data science
* `your favorite lang` == your use cases

So what ecosystems(lives) are we building around/for ourselves with languages, that might be 
slightly biased. I was hoping, that some online dictionary,
would at least give Me some new word meaning "success-achievement-glory" in one
word, that I just never knew existed, but no.  

What truly horrifies Me, is that "positive-thinking" people might been right all the long. 
They used to be so amusing to Me, their mission to motivate people to "do something!", 
"dream big", always seemed bs to Me. "Life coaches", "mentors" oh, You name it.

On one had I still would not buy a course from a "life coach", on the other hand, 
would mind the usage of more careful.

