---
layout: post
title:  "What are we celebrating exactly?"
date:   2022-12-29 00:00:11 +0200
categories: [common-sense]
published: true
last_edit: 2022-12-29
---

This is fete - celebrate, that is a mourning - be sad, this is pandemic - be scared.    
How do some things even become celebrations/fetes/holidays? What makes some date or
event special? No issues with personal events, likely person knows
meaning of His events. But national or international events, are weird.  
**TLDR**: Happy new Year.

Mostly applicable to post-soviet people, since Christmas(which actually
means something) was never a big thing, but New Year celebration was always 
big. And since it is this time of year now, a little rant.

Since I was a kid, there has always been big excitement about awaiting the new
year's day. You prepare presents, all family gathers at one table, put boxes
under the decorated pine tree, huge amounts of food and drinks, everyone is
dressed up in best clothes. TV is on, to watch the president's speech and hear
the main clock hitting 12 times at midnight. Oh, You also had to make a wish
during those bells. Sparkling wine, shouting, hugging and fireworks outside.
And unpacking the presents in the morning.

You might as well be lucky to see a real grandfather frost (Santa), arranged 
by Your parents or maybe even Your father Himself dressed up with a fake beard.

Without any irony, this is a great event for **kids**. There is also a time when 
You tell Your kids that the grandfather frost was played by You. And presents, 
never came from a mystic being, who lives in the North. 

Back to the calendar, what makes a date universally significant? The astronomical
dates come to mind immediately. They are significant for farming, good. We are
mostly not farmers, and don't celebrate Solstices though. The astronomical
events at least have some meaning to them, other than those, no dates are
universally special. This is not stating the obvious, it certainly was not
obvious for Me just recently. 

Small sidestep to increase the level of insanity a bit more.
The Russian orthodox church still uses old calendar, that is approximately 2 weeks
"late" in relation to modern one. (Julian vs Gregorian). That led Us to having two 
new Year celebrations, even the decorated pine tree was intended to last from 
"new Year"(31.12) to "old new Year"(13.01). The second celebration was more relaxed 
though, could be celebrated even without presents.

> "What is wrong with You? Don't like holidays?"
> --<cite>Reasonable question</cite>

I don't like not questioning stuff and doing as is. "Mindlessly" repeating what
everybody is doing might be useful for a kid. Probably this is how We learn. My
question is: **should a grown person question things He is about to do, or that
are suggested to Him?** Even if suggested by loving parents/friends, no to mention
international organizations that care and love You even more.  
Not to end like those monkeys: [5 monkey experiment](https://www.proserveit.com/blog/five-monkeys-experiment-lessons)

Recently I proposed My closest people to be "creative" about celebrating New
Year, and make the big gathering, but on 4th of January, or 10th or any other date.
To have a bigger selection of guest houses, since most places are reserved
for 31st of December since June. Just getting the most out of Your money.

It made literally no sense to anyone. Cause it has to be on 31st of December.
It does not matter that there would be the same people, same presents, same booze,
same pine tree and even better & bigger place - No.

Well, there one more thing though - "the New Year's miracle". Which can happen
only on right date. This is a "real thing" on post-soviet TV, which influenced
people a lot.

I am not against miracles, whatever works to make a person's life better.
Just remember that fat and obese people have a smaller miracle rate by 23%

Stay healthy!
